---
layout: default
title: "SOC101: Introduction to Sociology"
course_description: "This course is designed to introduce you to a range of basic sociological principles so that you can develop your own sociological imagination. You will learn about the origins of sociology as a discipline and be introduced to major sociological theories and methods of research. You will also explore such topics as sex and gender, deviance, and racism."
next: ../Unit01
previous: ../../../
---
Course Syllabus for "SOC101: Introduction to Sociology"
-------------------------------------------------------

Sociology is the scientific study of society. As such, it closely
examines human interactions and cultural phenomena, including topics
like inequality and urbanization and the effects of these on groups and
individuals. To do their work, sociologists rely on a philosophy of
science called positivism, which you will study in Unit 1. The
philosophy of positivism asserts that authentic knowledge, or truth, can
only be gained through empirical observations. In other words, we need
to be able to experience our observations or use scientific measurement
with a form of sensory experience, as opposed to using faith-based or
emotional experiences. Another central concept to sociology is that of
the sociological imagination. The sociological imagination allows
sociologists to make connections between personal experiences and larger
social issues. For example, did you know the U.S. has the highest rate
of teen pregnancy in the industrialized world? In order to understand
this trend, sociologists use scientific methods to make concrete
connections between social issues like sex education in schools,
sexualization in the media, and poverty and the personal issue of
teenage sexual activity and pregnancy. This course is designed to
introduce you to a range of basic sociological principles so that you
can develop your own sociological imagination. You will learn about the
origins of sociology as a discipline and be introduced to major
sociological theories and methods of research. You will also explore
such topics as sex and gender, deviance, and racism. As you move through
the course, try to develop your sociological imagination by relating the
topics and theories you read about to your own life experiences.

### Learning Outcomes

Upon successful completion of this course, you will be able to:  

-   define sociology and its purpose;
-   define and discuss sociological imagination;
-   use the sociological perspective or imagination to interpret or
    describe social phenomena, such as racism, sexism, and deviance;
-   describe and critically discuss major theoretical perspectives, such
    as conflict theory, structural functionalism, and symbolic
    interactionism; and
-   apply sociological concepts to observable events and social issues.

### Course Requirements

In order to take this course, you must:  
  
 √    have access to a computer;  
  
 √    have continuous broadband Internet access;  
  
 √    have the ability/permission to install plug-ins or software (e.g.,
Adobe Reader or Flash);  
  
 √    have the ability to download and save files and documents to a
computer;  
  
 √    have the ability to open Microsoft files and documents (.doc,
.ppt, .xls, etc.);  
  
 √    have competency in the English language; and  
  
 √    have read the [Saylor Student
Handbook](http://www.saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/Saylor-StudentHandbook.pdf).

### Course Information

Welcome to **SOC101 Introduction to Sociology**. General information
about this course and its requirements can be found below.  
  
 **Course Designer:** Kathryn Coleman  
  
 **Primary Resources:** This course makes primary use of the following
online textbook:  

-   Rice University: Nathan Kierns, Eric Strayer, Heather Griffiths,
    Susan Cody-Rydzewski, Gail Scaramuzzo, Tommy Sadler, and Sally
    Vyain’s *[Introduction to
    Sociology](http://cnx.org/content/m43493/latest/?collection=col11407/1.7)*

**Requirements for Completion:** In order to complete this course, you
will need to work through each unit and all of its assigned materials,
including the assessments. Pay special attention to Unit 1 and Unit 2,
as these lay the groundwork for understanding the more advanced material
presented in the later units.  
  
 In order to pass this course, you will need to complete the final exam
and earn a grade of 70% or higher. Your grade on the exam will be
tabulated as soon as you finish it. If you do not pass the exam, you may
take it again.  
  
 Note that you will only receive an official grade on your final exam.
However, in order to adequately prepare for it, you will need to work
through all the reading assignments and the accompanying assessments in
the course.  
  
 **Time Commitment:** This course should take you a total of
approximately **95.25 hours**. Each unit includes a time advisory that
lists the amount of time you are expected to spend on each subunit.
These should help you plan your time accordingly. It may be useful to
take a look at these time advisories and to determine how much time you
have over the next few weeks to complete each unit in order to set goals
for yourself. For example, Unit 1 should take you approximately 13.75
hours. Perhaps you can sit down with your calendar and decide to
complete Subunit 1.1 (a total of 5 hours) on Monday, Subunit 1.2 (a
total of 8.75 hours) on Tuesday and Wednesday night, etc.  
  

